How can I test for the presence of protein? Biuret test. In lab, we will be using the biuret test to test for the presence of proteins, specifically peptide bonds, in a series of samples. When performing chemical tests, it's important that you wear gloves to protect your hands from the materials you are using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. 

One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure, like something measured with grams, or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

Before starting this test, make sure that your sample tubes are well-labeled and that you have the proper reagent bottle, in this case, biuret reagent, in front of you. Each of your sample tubes will receive milliliters of the designated sample to be tested. Aliquot this amount for each sample using a different plastic pipette for each sample. Note the color of your sample solutions before you have added any reagent. 

When you go to dispense the biuret reagent, note the blue color of this reagent. Add three drops of the biuret reagent to each of your samples. Gently mix by flicking the bottom of the test tube. And then note the color of your sample now that you have added the biuret reagent. Wait two minutes and then record the color observed in each sample tube. A positive result will display a violet color. The intensity of the violet color reflects the concentration of the peptide bonds. More peptide bonds equals a darker violet color. 

Remember to compare the before color of your sample with the biuret reagent to your after color sample. Also, compare your unknown samples to your positive control and negative control samples. Proceed to data analysis. 