Lab three-- Let's see how to use pH paper. In working research labs, a pH meter is often used to determine the pH of samples and solutions. This instrument can provide accurate measurements to two decimal places. But it is expensive and requires calibration to maintain an accurate pH range. For our needs in our lab, pH strips are a less expensive option that although are less accurate than a pH meter, no decimal places, still provides us with a measurable range of pH. Think whole numbers. 

In lab, we will be using pH paper to determine the relative pH of a series of samples. When performing chemical tests, it is important that you wear gloves to protect your hands from the materials that you are going to be using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. 

One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure, like something measured with grams, or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

You will be using a well plate for this test. Each well or indentation in the plate can hold a unique sample. Before starting the test, make sure that each well is properly labeled such that you know which sample will be placed in that well. Each of the wells will receive two drops of their designated sample to be tested in that specific well. Aliquot this amount for each sample using a different plastic pipette for each sample. Note the color of your sample solutions in each well. Remove the pH strip from the pH strip dispenser. Note the color of the strip before you use it. Dip the pH strip into the designated sample well solution. 

Compare the color of the pH strip after the dipping to the pH scale color key located on the side of the pH strip dispenser. On the unused edge of the pH strip, write down the observed pH based on the color key and the sample name. Process the rest of your samples using the same method. Compare your unknown sample results to the control sample results. Now, proceed to data analysis. 