Hi. I'm Christy Strong. 

I'm Jennifer Utz. 

And we are faculty members in the School of Life Sciences. Jen, what do we mean by community? 

Well, it does have a specific meaning in the context of biology. So when we're thinking about biological communities, we're thinking about a variety of populations, right? Population, a group of the same species. 

So we're thinking about a variety of different populations, of different species, and how they're interacting in their environment. So we're kind of living in the same place, right? In a similar environment, which. Allows them to interact with one another. 

And I'm sure, as everyone can guess, based, on the kind of framework of the chart that we've laid out there are a variety of different types of interactions that can happen between individual members of species of populations in the community. 

So as we work through these different types of interactions, we'll see that each type of interaction influences kind of the interacting individuals, which we just have kind of schematically up here as an individual from species X and individual from species Y, in different ways. So why don't you start explaining these interactions, and I'll kind of map things out on the chart here. 

So our first interaction is parasitism. 

Right. 

So we're thinking about a parasite. 

Relationships, right? And so the idea is, if species X is the parasite, it is benefiting from this interaction, because it is getting some sort of resource. 

Right. 

Now, positive represents that it is positive for that individual. 

Right. So species X, the parasite. OK. If one has to be the parasite, one has to be the victim. Species Y is the host. And so the host is losing resources. That's negative for the host. 

So like a real life example of parasitism would be if we found, say, a tick on a zebra, right? And so in this instance, the Tick would be species X, because the tick is drawing in the blood of the zebra, and benefiting from those nutrients, while the zebra would represent species Y, because it is losing resources, in that it's losing its blood. 

So one benefits, one loses out. 

OK. What about predation? 

Yeah. Oftentimes, students sometimes will confuse parasitism and predation. A tick can live on a zebra and not kill it. 

Right. 

Predation, you have to kill it and then eat it, right? So species X, , if it is the predator I kill you and I eat you. So it's getting something out of this situation. It's benefiting. 

Versus if you are the prey, you have to die, which means that's not a good situation for you. 

All cycle of life and all. 

Exactly. So say that we have the poor sweet zebra, and along comes Simba the lion. 

Oh. OK. 

Right? So the lion is going to kill the zebra, and then consume the zebra. 

So we know that our lion again is a predator, a carnivore in this instance, where it is eating the flesh of the zebra in order to benefit. 

OK. . All right what about mutualism? 

Mutualism, we both get something out of this relationship. It's a good thing, right? 

Win-win. 

Exactly. So with mutualism, this one is an interesting one. So say we have a zebra, right? That was dealing with that tick. And the zebra's like, "Oh, this is a bad situation. I can't get that tick off me." What can happen is, you can have a bird that comes in and says, "Hey, Mr. Zebra, I got this. That tick, that's my food resource. If you will allow me access to you to get the tick, I will relieve you of this parasite." 

So here, the zebra, benefits because someone's cleaning me up, so, that I don't have parasites so I'm no longer losing resources. So beneficial for the zebra. And the bird benefits because it's like, I've got access to my food resource. 

OK. 

So win-win for both of these species. 

Perfect. I like that. 

All right what about commensalism? 

Commensalism, that one is, one of us benefits, and the other one could care less. It's like, it doesn't help me. Doesn't hurt me. Whatever. It's fine. And so when we think about-- 

So a neutral. So I'm going to put a zero here. 

Neutral. 

So here, what we can see is, with commensalism, someone benefiting. Say the zebra is walking along, right? Serengeti. And as it's walking along, it's like, kicks up a rock. And underneath the rock are these bugs. A bird goes, "Food!" Jumps on those bugs. The bird here would be benefiting from following the zebra around, because it's like, "Oh, you just revealed a food resource to me. That is fantastic." The zebra goes, wah. It didn't-- 

Just walking along. 

Hey, I'm just walking along. It didn't hurt me to kick up that rock. Didn't help me to kick up that rock. It's fine. It's neutral. 

OK. 

So the zebra, no interaction, just walking around. But the bird, right, species X in this case, is getting a positive benefit. A food source was uncovered. 

Exactly. And so this example can also tie into amensalism. 

OK. What is that? 

Amensalism, one of us gets hurt. 

Oh, OK. Negative for one. 

Yep. And the other one's like, "Meh. Sorry." 

Neutral for the other. 

It didn't help me. It didn't hurt me. Sorry. 

So if we talk about the zebra rock situation, right? We saw that with commensalism, the bird was benefiting. The zebra could care less. If we look at that example and we go, what about those poor bugs. 

OK. 

Right? So the bugs, they're the victims, right? So they're having this negative outcome, and the zebra's like, "Meh, sorry. I'm not benefiting from you dying. I'm not getting hurt from you dying. It's just happening as a consequence of me kicking over this rock." 

OK. So in that case, the bugs, right? Negative impact would theoretically be just species X as we've laid it out here. The zebra, again, just walking along, neutral. No real positive or negative influence to the zebra. 

Exactly. 

OK. And what about our last example here, competition? 

We're both hurt. 

Oh no. 

We're both suffering from this situation. 

Well that sounds bad. 

So again, we're on the Serengeti. We're the zebra. We need to eat grass. And those darn gazelles-- 

Oh, I hate those gazelles. 

Are trying to eat the same patch of grass. So we're both competing for the same resource. And so because we're competing, we have to put energy towards this competition, which means that we're losing out, because we have to do it, right? But we're not benefiting that strongly from it. It's like, we have to do it. No matter what, we have to. 

So we're both losing out. If there were no gazelles around, hey it's great. 

Right. Then the zebras could invest that energy into other things, like growth, or reproduction. 

Or running away from the lions, right? 

And same thing for the gazelles. If there were no zebra around, they wouldn't have to be investing that energy and in competition. They would have more energy to direct toward their activities. 

OK. So we've got these different types of interactions that can occur between different species, between populations that are interacting as part of a community. And we can kind of distinguish them based on thinking about the effects, how it affects the two members. And we have lots of different combinations, right? Positive for one, negative for the other. Positive for both. Negative for both. Positive for one, neutral for the other. Negative for one, neutral for the other. 

So we've kind of mapped all this out. But I think a piece we should emphasize is the layering, the adding together, right? Which we kind of worked through these examples. There's more than one potential interaction happening for this zebra, right? It's not just experiencing one or the other of these types of interactions. But it can be experiencing a whole combination of them simultaneously. 

Exactly. We can make a web. 

Some space here. 

Yes. 

All right. Let's map it out. Let's kind of think about what's happening to the zebra. 

So let's put the zebra in the middle, right? I'll focus on the zebra. 

OK. 

So parasitism. We know that the zebra has to have an interaction with the tick. 

OK. 

All right? We're going to go through the interaction first, and then we're going to label the interactions. 

OK. 

OK? So that when color code it. So, OK. Zebra has interaction with the tick. Zebra has an interaction with a lion. 

Yep. 

Zebra has an interaction with a bird. Now notice that we've got different birds. So I'm going to label them, so you know which bird we're actually working with, right? 

So we here have got the tick eating bird. And then the zebra here is going to interact with a bird, where it knocks a rock open, right? So that's a different interaction. 

So we're going to have here the zebra interacting with the, we'll call it the rock bird. And when it's interacting with the rock bird, it's interacting with the rock insects. 

OK. Right. Whatever insects were living underneath that rock. OK. 

And then oh, the gazelle. So I believe that we had everybody. But we double check. OK. So we've got the tick. Great. We got the lion. Great. We've got the bird working with the rock. Great. We've got the bird working with the tick. Great. We've got the bugs under the rock. Great. And then we've got the gazelle. So we've got everybody-- 

Should we mark the interaction from the eating bird to the tick? 

We're going to start, yeah. We're going to start color coding what's going on with those interactions. 

OK. 

So-- 

Here's your color for parasitism. 

Parasitism, right? So the idea here is, this interaction between the zebra and the tick, this is parasitism. OK. 

So again, zebra losing out. Tick, rocking this world. 

OK. 

All right? OK. 

So-- 

Predation. 

Predation. We've got the poor sweet zebra being eaten by the lion. 

Now there are other examples, technically, of predation going on here, right? So what about this tick eating bird? 

And the tick? 

And the tick. 

Right. That's predation. The bird is eating the tick. 

Right? Oh, and-- 

The tick dies. The bird benefits. 

You got another one, right? Got a predation situation going on here. 

OK. 

Right? It's like, OK. Anybody else? Technically, we know that lion's is going to be able to grab the gazelle, too. But we'll just, yeah, just in case. Yeah, because this is going to happen. 

Yep, that could happen, too. 

OK. So we've got our predation situation. Then we've got mutualism. We both need to benefit from this situation, right? And so in this case, the way that we're going to have that benefit for the zebra is by interacting with that tick eating bird, right? So this is a mutualistic. 

Right. The zebra benefited by having the tick parasite removed. The bird benefited from the food source. 

something to eat. 

So that was a win-win situation. commensalism, one of us has got to get something out of it, and the other one's going "Meh, I don't care." That was the relationship between the zebra and the rock bird, right? Because the rock bird is getting a food resource, and the zebra is just like, I just happened to be at the right place at the right time. I didn't get anything out of this. 

Right. Just passing by. 

Exactly. So then, we've got amensalism. Someone's getting hurt, and the other one didn't benefit from it. That's the zebra interacting with the rock insects, right? And so the zebra, I kicked over the rock and exposed you. I didn't benefit from it, but you died. So that was tragic for you. 

And then, last but not least, competition. So it's like, we want the same thing at the same time. That's my zebra and gazelle. 

Which is negative negative. 

Exactly. And so you can see here, you know, if we really are making him the zebra, the center of this web, there is a lot going on with regard to its relationships, right? And that's just, that's any organism that's out there in the environment. Think about the kind of relationships that you have out in the environment, right? 

And so being able to map them all indicates that you really understand what's going on with the lifestyle of this organism. So like, if we were to ask you, you know, here's an organism. This is where it lives. These are the other species it encounters. Could you map it? You should be able to, when you have the right resources, map it out and explain it. Because if you can explain A, B, C, D like we did, then you have a better understanding of the ecology behind these types of interactions. 

And so you're going to do this in lab. So make sure that, again, you know, you are reading your lab, coming prepared to lab, and being thoughtful about this process. And we'll see you in lab. 