Lab 7, Paper chromatography, a.k.a., separation of plant pigments. 

In lab, we will be examining plant pigments found in a plant specimen. You will need to properly up set the experiment in order to collect useful data. 

When performing your experiments, it is important that you wear gloves. This allows you to protect your hands from the materials that you will be using in the experiment. 

Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. 1, What is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? 2, What type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or a quantitative measure, like something measured with grams or millimeters? 

Number 3, Are there controls? And if so, what are they? 

And number 4, What types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

You will be provided with a circle of filter paper and a chromatography vial. You will need to cut a strip from the filter paper to hang in the chromatography vial. Make sure that the strip that you cut is not too wide, to fit easily into the vial. 

At the bottom of the filter paper strip, cut the strip to form a V-pattern. This is to allow the point of the 'V" to be the contact point of the filter paper strip with the solvent that you're going to place in the bottom of the chromatography vial. Check to make sure your filter paper strip still fits properly into the vial. 

Now, using a pencil, make a pencil line along the bottom edge of the filter paper, just before this section of the filter paper where it begins to "V." Also make a pencil line 1 centimeter from the top of where the filter paper would be pinned to the cork of the chromatography vial. 

Now, take a plant leaf specimen provided by your lab instructor and fold it into quarters. Place the folded leaf on the pencil line located at the bottom of the filter strip. 

Using the penny provided, firmly roll the penny over the leaf until the leaf stains the filter paper located below it. Be careful not to tear the filter paper. 

Attach the top of the filled paper strip to the chromatography vial's cork. This could have also been done earlier in the experiment if you wanted. Carefully add enough of the isopropyl solvent provided by your lab instructor to the chromatography vial, to potentially wet the very tip of the "V" formed by the filter paper strip. 

Now, carefully insert and seal the filter strip into the chromatography vial containing the isopropyl solvent. You will notice a wicking of the isopropyl solvent onto the strip via capillary action. 

Allow this capillary action to continue until the solvent front reaches the top pencil line. Once this moist-looking line is reached, remove the filter strip from the chromatography vial. Allow the strip to air dry. And then proceed to the analysis portion of the experiment. 