Lab 7, Alcoholic Fermentation. In lab, we will be examining fermentation of sugars by yeast. You will need to properly set up the experiment in order to collect useful data. When performing experiments, it is important that you wear gloves to protect your hands from the materials you are using in these experiments. 

Before you performing any experiment, you shouldn't mentally review the following. One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? 

Is it qualitative, like a color change, or a quantitative measure, like something major with grams or millimeters? Number three, are there controls, and if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

Using a Sharpie pen, label five test tubes-- one, two, three, four, five. Tube one will receive a 10% glucose solution. Tube two will receive a 10% sucrose solution. Tube three will receive a 10% galactose solution. Tube four will receive a 10% starch solution. And tube five will receive distilled water. 

In addition to these tubes, you will also be provided with five vials. Also label these five vials one through five. Fill each of your test tubes up halfway full with their designated solution. You will fill the remaining half of each test tube with a yeast solution provided by your instructor. 

Once you have added the yeast solution to the test tube, you will need to quickly but carefully place the test tube into the designated vial such that the mouth of the test tube is touching the bottom of the vial. Quickly invert the vial test tube system. 

Carefully place this inverted setup into a warm water bath. Using a Sharpie, mark where the current gas bubble exists in each of your sample setups. During a 20 minute window, every two minutes, use a ruler to measure and then record the gas levels in each tube. Be sure to avoid disturbing the tubes. Upon completion of your data recording, proceed with your data analysis. 