Lab five-- How to test for the presence of amino acids. In lab, we will be doing a multipart experiment to test the effects of two enzymes, renalase and bacterial protease. In the first video, you saw how renalase catalyzes the reaction to convert soluble milk protein into insoluble paracasein in the process of making cheese curds. 

The cheese curd products from this first part of the experiment will now be used in the second part of the experiment that will examine the release of amino acids from the protein chains contained in the cheese curds by bacterial protease. The released amino acids will be detected using the reagent ninhydrin, which produces a purple color in the presence of free or released amino acids. 

When performing your chemical tests, it is important that you wear gloves to protect your hands from materials you are using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? 

Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure, like something measured with grams, or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

Before starting the test, make sure that you have two 250 milliliter beakers. Label one beaker with enzyme and the other beaker with none. From your cheese curds sample, remove two curds of approximately the same size. They should be about the size of a marble. Place one of the cheese curds in the beaker labeled enzyme and the other cheese curd in the beaker labeled none. To each of your beakers, add 10 milliliters of water. Stir each beaker until the curd in the beaker is broken up. 

Weigh out one gram of bacterial protease powder in a weigh dish on your electronic scale. Carefully add the measured bacterial protease powder to only the enzyme beaker. Do not add it to the none beaker. Briefly stir both beakers, making sure to use two different pipettes or two different glass stir rods during this process. Let both of your beakers sit undisturbed on your lab bench for five minutes. 

Obtain two glass funnels, two pieces of cheesecloth, and two glass tubes. First, place the glass funnel in the glass tube, and then place a piece of cheesecloth in the mouth of the funnel. Repeat this a second time. Label one of your funnel tube setups as enzyme, and label the other as none. Pour 5 millimeters from each respective beaker into the designated funnel setup. 

Once the liquid is collected, set aside the beakers and the glass funnel cheesecloth setups. Add 1 milliliter of your ninhydrin reagent to each of your test tube samples, your enzyme and your none. Gently mix each sample by flicking the bottom of the test tube. Carefully place the test tubes in a boiling water bath for 10 minutes. After 10 minutes, carefully remove the test tubes. Record and compare the results of the two samples, and proceed to data analysis. 