Lab five-- How is the catalase experiment done? In lab, we'll be using the catalase test on tissues to test for the presence of catalase in the cells that make up the tissue sample. When performing chemical tests, it is important that you wear gloves to protect your hands from the materials that you are using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. 

One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure, like something measured with grams, or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

Before starting the catalase test, make sure that your sample tube is well-labeled and that you have the proper reagent bottle, in this case, hydrogen peroxide, in front of you. For this initial experiment, you have two possible options for setting up the experiment. You could put the liver sample, the source of catalase, in the test tube, and then add the hydrogen peroxide, the substrate. Or you could put the hydrogen peroxide, the substrate, into the test tube first, and then add the liver sample, the source of the catalase enzyme. 

In this video, we will show the experiment that represents the first option. You will be placing a small piece of liver about the size of a dime at the bottom of your test tube. You can use a glass stir rod or a clean plastic pipette to push the liver sample to the bottom of the tube. Now, add 1 milliliter of hydrogen peroxide. 

Note the bubbling that occurs because the enzyme, the catalase is located in the liver cells, is able to interact with its substrate hydrogen peroxide to catalyze the reaction to convert hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen gas. The oxygen gas is the source of the bubbles. Feel the bottom of the test tube. You will note that the bottom of the test tube feels warm to the touch. The reaction catalyzed by catalase is exothermic. It releases energy in the form of heat. 

Now that you know what to look for with regard to the reaction, you can proceed with your additional experiments that will allow you to examine the effects of reusing an enzyme, pH, temperature, and tissue source on catalase activity. 