Hi. I'm Christy Strong. 

I am Jennifer Utz. And we are both faculty members in the School of Life Sciences. So we are going to discuss this very important question. How are sperm cells, and how our egg cells, or oocytes, produced? 

So our process of producing the gametes-- the gametogenesis refers to the whole big picture. And then we can sort out spermatogenesis, which is the process of sperm formation, and oogenesis, which is the process of forming an oocyte, or an egg cell. 

So we're going to walk through these processes. And then we'll kind of compare and contrast. Because we've got some components that are similar and then some components that are really different. 

So if we think about the process of spermatogenesis of forming sperm cells, we can trace all the way back to a population of primordial germ cells that are found in the embryo-- so very, very early in development, those cells are diploid-- 2n, two copies of each of our types of chromosomes. And those primordial germ cells are going to go through cell division using mitosis. 

So think back. Mitosis is going to give us two daughter cells that are genetically identical to each other and to the parent cell. So we're going to build up this population of spermatogonium cells. And then we're going to kind of pause. And we'll see these cells won't be really active until we move forward and we get to the point of puberty and reproduction system maturation. 

So once we get to that point of maturation and we get different hormone signals, we're going to start seeing more activity in these cells. So then our spermatogonium cells will divide by mitosis. 

Again, mitosis gives us two daughter cells. But now, we'll see those two daughter cells are going to be on different paths, which is why we have these two arrows. 

So one of those two daughter cells will retain its identity as a spermatogonium cell. And that'll allow it to go through more division and kind of keep the cells running through this process moving forward. 

And the second daughter cell will mature into a primary spermatocyte. Now we're still in a diploid state, still 2n. That primary spermatocyte will go through the process of DNA replication. But now when it goes to sort out those duplicate copies of the genome, instead of sorting by mitosis, we'll sort by meiosis. 

So the primary spermatocyte will progress through the first phase, meiosis I. And then we'll get our two cells at the end of that first round of division. Those are called the secondary spermatocytes. 

And those cells are now going to be in a haploid state. Even though we've still got DNA in a duplicated form, we just have one type of information. We just have one type of information, basically, for each of our chromosomes. So we have just n or 1n for our haploid state. 

And then those secondary spermatocytes will progress through meiosis II. So each of these cells will divide it into our daughter cells. 

And so those cells, the four cells that we produce at the end of both rounds of our meiotic divisions, those are called spermatids. And those spermatids are still pretty typical looking cells. We've got the nucleus. We've got the cytoplasm and the standard organelles. 

And then the last step is a process of differentiation or really specializing the structures and functions of the cells. So those spermatids will mature into spermatozoa or sperm cells. And then that process of differentiation will really reconfigure the cell. 

So a lot of the cytoplasm and organelles will be removed. We just have tightly packed DNA. We'll build a flagella, right? This is the only flagellated cell in the human system. So that's really unique. 

So our process of spermatogenesis, big picture, it involves cell division by mitosis, it involves cell division by meiosis, and then it also involves this final kind of cell specialization and differentiation process. So how does that compare to oogenesis, in forming an egg cell? 

We're going to see mitosis. We're going to see meiosis. But we're going to see timing's a little different. And we're going to see what you get in the end, even though it is haploid, you don't get as many. 

So like with spermatogenesis, when we talk about the potential for a biologically human male to have children, basically, from puberty to death, you hear about individuals that are in their 70s and 80s still, technically, having babies. 

Absolutely. 

So that's not the case for females, right? 

Puberty onwards. 

So my females, uh-huh, right? We have this thing within the human female that we call menopause where your reproductive age has ended. You will no longer-- 

Reproductive system function ceases. 

Done. And so we're going to see why. Why does that happen? Why does it happen for females, but not for males? 

Right. Well, we have a process to keep making cells here. 

Right. We're going to see that's not necessarily the case here. So with oogenesis, similar to what we saw with spermatogenesis, we've got our primordial germ cell, 2n, OK? Haploid, 46 chromosomes. 

Diploid. 

I'm sorry, diploid. Wow, see. Words come out. Diploid. So 46 chromosomes, 23 pairs. It's going to undergo mitosis. It'll produced two cells. 

These are my oogonium. It is also diploid, 46 chromosomes. That's going to undergo mitosis, two identical cells. These are my primary oocytes. 

OK. So we're kind of at an equivalent step to our primary spermatocyte. 

And this was happening in the embryo. And then we stop. We get what we call arrested, or stopped, in prophase I of meiosis I. So it's like you push Pause. 

OK. So those cells start this process of division. But they don't complete it. 

Yep. 

So they go partway and pause. 

And then they pause. 

Freeze in place. 

So that's different than what we saw over here with our males, where, we hit puberty. 

Just running continuously all the time. 

Then we'd run right through it. Here we started meiosis. We're an embryo still. 

Right. 

This is your limitation right here in that my female baby is born with as many oocytes as she's ever going to have. 

OK. 

And then you have the clock starts ticking once we hit puberty. 

Right. So during gestational development, during pregnancy, as baby girl is growing and developing in mom's uterus, this is happening. So we've got cell division. And then we're going to get to the point where we have some number of primary oocytes. And that's basically going to be the number we have to kind of carry forward and work with. 

And then, those primary oocytes will be partway. They'll get started with meiosis I. And then they stop and freeze in place. 

Yep. 

OK. So it's very different. 

And then we hit puberty. So once we hit puberty, then our primary oocyte is going to be able to complete meiosis I, start meiosis II. So start the meiosis I. The products of meiosis I, we're going to end up with our first polar body. Throw it away. Worthless. We're not going to be using this in the process anymore, unlike what we saw over here. Goodbye. You're done. 

Now we have our secondary oocyte. So our secondary oocyte is haploid. It's going to just wait. So it's waiting in those ovaries. And so what's going to happen is every you know, 30 to 35 days, it depends on the female cycle, they will go through this ovulation period. And it's the ovulation period is when they're going to release the egg. 

So here what they're talking about is release the secondary oocyte, right? So once the secondary oocyte is released-- and on average, is one per month, right-- if it is not going to encounter a sperm, it's done. It will never complete meiosis II. 

Instead, the human body will go through the menstrual cycle where it sheds the lining of the uterus and disposes of the secondary oocyte. Now if there happens to be a sperm available, and it is able to enter our secondary oocyte what's going to then happen is that that secondary oocyte is going to be able to complete meiosis II with the sperm inside of it. 

So we're only going to finish that process of division if fertilization happens. 

Exactly. 

Otherwise that cell just stays frozen in place and kind of deteriorates and is broken down. 

Exactly. And so when we go to complete meiosis II, we kick off what we call a second Polar Body, which is, basically, the idea of the extra DNA that's not being used. That anymore. And that's going to generally deteriorate and be broken down. 

Exactly. And so then we have our fertilized egg, which has both our sperm, which is the haploid cell n. And the nucleus of our egg cell which is haploid n. And so, they'll come together and eventually through that fusion, forming what we call the zygote. 

Right. Our fertilized egg. We get a 2n cell. 

So now we're back to our standard deployed state. Half the genetic information coming from mom, half the genetic information coming from dad. And then we'd start our cell division by mitosis, again. 

Exactly. And so, again, we can see, compare contrast. Our males have a system where they're continuously generating-- how many sperm do you think, on average, a day? 

Hundreds of millions. Versus our females. One cell roughly every month for a limited period of time. 

Exactly. And so what we'll is with our females, you have a fixed period of what we call your reproductive age versus our males' much more extended. 

OK. And so this is just giving more specific example of the processes of mitosis and meiosis that we talked about, in general, before here applied to human beings. 