Lab six-- Hypotonicity and hypertonicity in plant cells. In lab, you will be examining osmosis using the model organism elodea and various environmental conditions. You will need to properly set the experiment in order to collect useful data. When performing chemical tests, it is important that you wear gloves to protect your hands from the materials you are using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. 

One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure like something measured with grams or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

Obtain three slides and three cover slips. You will label the slides before beginning the experiment. Using a wax pencil, label slide one on the top right corner with a capital C. Label slide two with a capital O and slide with a capital E. Slide one will represent the control solution condition. Slide two will represent the hypotonic solution condition. And slide three will represent the hypertonic solution condition. 

Obtain a sample of the elodea plant. Gently remove three leaves of approximately the same size from the elodea plant using a scalpel. Please be aware, a scalpel is sharp and avoid cutting yourself. For the slide labeled with a capital C, use tap water to prepare a wet mount of one of the elodea leaves. Observe the slide using your microscope. Record your observations using the 40x objective, 400x magnification. 

For the slide labeled O, use distilled water to prepare a wet mount of one of the elodea leaves. Observe the slide using your microscope. Record your observations using the 40x objective, 400x magnification. For the slide labeled E, use a 10% sodium chloride solution to prepare a wet mount of one of the elodea leaves. Observe the slide using your microscope. Record your observations using the 40x objective, 400x magnification. Now you can proceed to the data analysis portion of this experiment. 