Lab 7, Observing Stoma and Guard Cells. In lab, we will be examining stoma and guard cells from a plant specimen. You will need to properly set up the experiment in order to collect useful data. When performing your experiments, it's important that you wear gloves. We have to protect our hands from the materials that we are using in our experiments. 

Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable, and how are you actually measuring the outcome? 

Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure, like something major with grams or millimeters? Number three, are there controls, and if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

Obtain a leaf exposed to sunlight from your instructor. Carefully paint a one square centimeter patch of clear fingernail polish on the underside of the leaf. Let the fingernail polish dry completely. Once the fingernail polish has dried completely, carefully place a piece of clear tape over the dried fingernail polish section on the leaf. Gently peel the tape, with the fingernail polish attached, free from the leaf. 

Place the tape on a clean microscope slide. Observe the slide using your microscope. Record your observations of the stoma and the guard cells using the 40x objective, which gives you 400x magnification. Obtain a leaf kept in the dark from your instructor. Carefully paint a one square centimeter patch of clear fingernail polish on the underside of this leaf, then let the fingernail polish dry completely. 

Once the fingernail polish has dried completely, carefully place a piece of clear tape over the dried finger nail polish. Then gently peel the tape, along with the fingernail polish attached, free from the leaf. Place the tape on a clean microscope slide, and then observe the slide using your microscope. Record your observations of the stoma and the guard cells using the 40x objective, which gives you 400x magnification. Proceed to data analysis. 