Lab five-- How to make cheese. In lab, we will doing a multipart experiment to test the effects of two enzymes-- renalase and bacterial protease. In this first video, you will see how renalase catalyzes a reaction to convert soluble milk protein into insoluble paracasein in the process of making cheese curds. The cheese curd products from this first part of the experiment will then be used in the second part of the experiment that examines the release of amino acids from protein chains by bacterial protease. 

When performing chemical tests, it's important that you wear gloves to protect your hands from the materials you are using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? 

Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure like something measured with grams, or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

First, pour 250 milliliters of whole milk into a 400 milliliter beaker. Then carefully add five drops of 1 molar HCl to the milk. Transfer this milk-containing beaker into a hot water bath. Place a thermometer into the beaker. Gently stir the milk continuously until the milk reaches 32 degrees Celsius. Once the milk reaches 32 degrees Celsius, carefully add three drops of renalase to the beaker and then carefully remove the beaker from the hot water bath. Let the beaker sit undisturbed on your lab bench for 15 minutes. 

You should begin to see the milk coagulating, a.k.a. becoming insoluble, at the surface of the liquid. After 15 minutes, break up the curd that is located at the surface of the milk using a glass rod or a plastic pipette. Then you're going to place cheesecloth across a clean 400 millimeter beaker. 

And the reason that you do this is that we will use the cheesecloth as a filter to separate the cheese curds from the liquid portion that's found in the beaker. Carefully pour the contents of your experimental beaker onto the cheesecloth, making sure the cheesecloth doesn't fall completely into the beaker. The liquid portion, known as whey, will pass through the cheesecloth, while the solid portion, known as the cheese curds, will remain on top of the cheesecloth. 

Once you have completed your pour, set aside the whey located in the beaker, since we will not be using that in the next part of our multipart experiment. Place the cheesecloth that contains the cheese curds onto a paper towel. Allow these cheese curds to sit on your lab bench for approximately 10 minutes before proceeding to the second part of your experiment, which is how to test for the presence of amino acids. 