Lab six-- Osmosis in potato cells. In lab, we'll be examining osmosis using potato tissue and various environmental conditions. You will need to properly set up the experiment in order to collect useful data. When performing chemical tests, it is crucial that you wear gloves to protect your hands from the materials you are using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. 

One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure, like something measured with grams, or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

Use the tools provided, either a knife or a cork borer, to make three potato cores. Each core should be approximately 3 centimeters in length. The potato cores should also be relatively the same mass, so that means you need to check the mass. Measure and record the mass of each core using the electronic scale and the weigh dish. Record the physical texture of each potato core. Label three test tubes-- tube A as diH2O, tube B as 2% salt solution, and tube C as 10% salt solution. 

Your instructor may provide you with plastic sample cups instead of test tubes. In this video, we will be showing you how to do the experiment with plastic sample cups. Into each designated container, place one potato core. Record which potato core went into which container. Add approximately the same volume of the designated solution to the designated container such that each potato core is completely submerged under the solution. 

Allow the potato cores to sit in their designated solutions undisturbed for 30 minutes. After 30 minutes, transfer the potato cores to a sheet of parafilm. Label the parafilm so that you can keep track of which core came from which condition. Measure and record the mass of each core. Measure and record the length of each core. Measure and record the texture of each core. Proceed with the data analysis for this experiment as described in your lab manual. 