Lab three-- Understanding basic chemistry. How can I test for the presence of carbohydrates? Benedict's test and iodine test. In lab, we will be using the Benedict's test to test for reducing sugars in a series of samples. Reducing sugars are generally monosaccharides, but sometimes disaccharides. They are classified as reducing sugars because when examining their molecular structure, you can see that the reducing sugar possesses a free aldehyde, or free ketone group. These groups can reduce oxidizing agents such as copper ions to produce a colored precipitate. 

When performing chemical tests, it is important that you wear your gloves to protect your hands from the materials you are using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? 

Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure, like something measured with grams, or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

Before starting the Benedict's test, make sure that your sample tubes are well labeled and that you have the proper reagent bottle, in this case, Benedict's, in front of you. Each of your sample tubes will receive 3 milliliters of the designated sample to be tested. Go ahead and aliquot this amount for each sample using a different plastic pipette for each sample. Record the color of your sample solutions before you have added any reagent. 

When you go to dispense the Benedict's reagent, note the blue color of this reagent. Add 1 milliliter equivalent to 20 drops of the Benedict's reagent to each of your samples. Gently mix by flicking the bottom of the test tube. Go ahead and then record the color of your sample now that you have added the Benedict's reagent. 

Place the test tube samples into the heated hot water bath for approximately three minutes during which you will regularly check for color changes in the test tubes. Carefully remove the samples from the water bath after three minutes and place in your test tube rack holder. 

What you will note is there can be range of precipitate colors that can occur, depending on the concentration of simple sugars in the sample. Blue will be represented by water. Green would represent a low concentration of simple sugars, while yellow and orange, a medium concentration, and red, a high concentration. Remember to compare the before color of your sample that you recorded with the Benedict reagent to your after color sample. Also compare your unknown samples to your positive control and your negative control samples. Record your results and proceed to data analysis. 

In lab, we will be using the iodine test to test for the presence of starch in a series of samples. When performing chemical tests, it is important that you wear gloves to protect your hands from the materials you are using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. 

One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure, like something measured with grams, or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

Each of your sample tubes will receive milliliters of the designated sample to be tested. You will aliquot this amount for each sample using a different plastic pipette for each sample. Record the color of your sample solutions before you have added any reagent. When you go to dispense the iodine reagent, note that the yellow color of this reagent occurs before you've even added anything. Add 5 drops of the iodine reagent to each of your samples. Gently mix by flicking the bottom of the test tube. 

And make sure to note and record the color of your samples now that you have added the iodine reagent. A sample that contains starch should produce a bluish-black color. A sample that contains dextrin or glycogen should produce an intermediate brownish-blue color. Any other colors are considered negative results. Be sure to compare your unknown samples to both your positive control and negative control samples. 