So what are lipids? Hi, I'm Christy Strong. 

I'm Jenifer Utz. 

And we are faculty members in the School of Life Sciences. Jen, give me examples of lipids. 

Fats and oils I think is how we generally think about them. We've got phospholipids, waxes, steroids, triglycerides, fatty acids-- 

OK, so they all have natural functions, right? 

Yes. 

So like steroids, what are steroids? Give me an example. 

So we could think about like sex hormones, testosterone, estrogen. Those are giving the body instructions about how to develop, what to do involved in communication and signaling. We could think about energy storage, right? Our triglycerides, that nice, soft, squishy fat tissue has a lot of energy stored in those triglycerides. And most of what we eat, if we think about the fats that we consume in our diet, a lot of that is triglyceride. 

Beeswax? 

Oh yeah. We can use lipids for kind of waxy coverings, for a coating to prevent water loss naturally on the surface of things, right? Like have waxy layers. 

So lipids can do a variety of functions in nature, right? 

Oh yeah, they're very diverse. 

Now, when we go look at them at the micro levels, we're looking at the molecules. When we talk about like carbs, or proteins, or nucleic acids, we talk about monomers and polymers. 

Right. 

And then we get to lipids. 

Yeah. They do not follow that monomer polymer relationship. So there's a lot of diversity. We don't have just a common building block. But we do see some common components in their structure. Even though there's not a building block, we see that the diverse forms are mostly built from carbon and hydrogen. 

Which is going to make them fear water, right? So how do we say that? 

Hydrophobic. So we can say they're hydrophobic hydrocarbons if we want to get really fancy. Right? Because they are non-polar covalent bonds, primarily forming the lipids carbon to carbon, carbon to hydrogen. So we have this non-polar, electrically neutral molecule not interacting with water, and then hydrocarbon, it's mostly built from hydrogen and carbon. 

And what's cool about them is because they're so diverse, if I were to compare butter-- which I love butter-- and olive oil-- 

Yes. 

--right? So they're both lipids. But if I set them out on my countertop, my butter stays solid, and my olive oil stays liquid. 

Right. 

Why? 

So it has to do with how the molecules pack together really tightly or don't pack together really tightly for that small scale structure. So if we kind of took apart the butter and olive oil and got down to a real small level, we'd see a major building block would be fatty acids. And if we look at those tails, or the hydrocarbon chains of the fatty acids, we can see some of them are saturated, meaning they're holding as much hydrogen as they can, which means we only have single bonds from carbon to carbon. And our saturated fatty acids have a straight structure, so they can line up and pack really tightly together, and hold tightly to one another, which makes them more solid, like the butter. 

And then others can be unsaturated, meaning they're not holding as much hydrogen as theoretically possible. And that happens if we get double bonds between carbons in the chain. And if we get a double bond, then that causes a bend or a kink in the structure of the tail. So when those tails are all kind of bent and twisted in different directions, they can't pack together so tightly. They move around more. They're more fluid. 

So if we look at the butter, the animal fat, versus the oil from a plant, we'll see this different balance of how much saturated versus unsaturated fat we have. So things that are higher in saturated fats are more solid. If we have more unsaturated fatty acids then we get something more liquid. 

OK, so we can look at temperature. But in lab we're not going to use temperature, right, really per se? 

Right. 

So what tests are we going to be using? 

So we can test for the presence of lipids with Sudan. 

OK. So the students should expect that they need to read about Sudan three and be prepared to evaluate the outcomes. 

Right. 

OK. 