OK. So today, scientific method. I'm Christi Strong. 

I am Jennifer Utz. 

And we are both faculty in the School of Life Sciences. 

Still. 

Still. Exactly. So scientific method. 

What is the scientific method? 

It's our way of approaching trying to ask questions and then answer them. So with scientists, we're all about the logic, right? 

Yes. 

We like paths. And the idea that there are certain paths that you can take that will lead you to the ability to answer questions, right. 

OK. 

And it may not be the answers that you wanted but it gives you the answers. 

Right. 

Nevertheless. 

So this is like our process. 

Exactly. Our process, our way of approaching things. And so it could be as simple as you have an ecologist walking outside and they notice in this, say, the Las Vegas Wash. They're looking and they see some frogs. And they're like, those frogs don't look right. 

Oh. 

All right. So that makes an observation like-- 

OK. So we notice something. 

Those frogs don't look right. Maybe they have extra legs. 

Oh. 

So instead of having four, maybe they've five. 

Or six. 

Yeah. So just, you know, four, five, six. It's weird. It's real weird. 

So we start with an observation. 

Yeah. 

We notice something in the world around us. 

Exactly. So then you observe it. You ask a question. 

OK. 

Like, what? Why? How? Huh? 

[LAUGHTER] 

Right? So you just ask this general question. 

And then we're done, right? 

No, no. We're scientists. We were just three-year-olds that just kept go in and our parents were like, please stop. 

[LAUGHTER] 

That's like my daughter. 

So we keep going. 

The questions never end. OK. 

Sometimes we go, let's go do some digging. Because maybe what I'm thinking is freaky is normal around here. So we do a little bit of research. We go, what is normal? 

We don't know everything? What? 

No. We don't know everything. 

OK. 

So you do a little bit of research to say, is this already known? Am I just behind on the times? I just don't know. But sometimes what turns out is, you know what? Nobody knows about this, right? There isn't any research out there. 

OK. 

And so at that point, you're like, OK, nobody knows about this. I got to figure out why. So in order to do that as a scientist, what I'm going to do is construct what is known as a hypothesis. 

OK. 

And so a hypothesis is a way of asking a question in a scientific way so that, actually, when you ask this question you have the ability to potentially prove or disprove things. So it's like I do not support my hypothesis or I do support my hypothesis. Because I could write something that-- there's no way that you can say it's wrong. 

Like what? 

So I could say-- what's a good one? You're reading my mind right now. 

[LAUGHTER] 

You know what I mean? Like, how-- 

Yeah. I can't measure that. 

Right. There's no way. And how am I going to demonstrate that I'm wrong or how are you going to demonstrate that I'm right? So it's those kind of-- they're weird. So things like-- 

So there are some constraints. 

There are constraints. 

OK. 

So questions about religion, you know? Like the big one, is there a god? We can't design a hypothesis to test that. 

Right. 

So anything to do with religion. Boop. Not going to be following this regiment. 

Yeah, we're kind of within the bounds of what we can observe and measure in the natural world. 

Exactly. And even opinions, right? Because opinions are so subjective, it depends on who you ask. It falls outside of the scheme. 

So, fact, quantifiable, observable, measurements. 

Exactly. 

Within the constraints of the natural world and the constraints of maybe the equipment or resources that we have. Right? To be able to measure things at certain scale. OK. 

Exactly. So like an hypothesis here. I saw those freaky frogs. I may say, I hypothesize that these frogs mutated as a result of chemicals being thrown into their environment. And I could be specific. I could be like maybe it was some kind of pesticide, maybe it was some kind of weird radioactive material. I can be very specific. And I can test that. 

Great. We can start to measure. We could take water samples, we could measure the concentrations of these chemicals. 

Exactly. 

We could maybe take DNA samples from the frogs, we could measure or detect different mutations, we could set up experiments maybe in a laboratory where we could expose them to certain concentrations of chemicals or other components. 

Exactly. So we're going to be able to design an experiment based on this hypothesis. 

OK. So then we start testing. 

Exactly. So we want to be intelligent when we're doing our experiments, so we need to have things like controls, and the idea of how are we going to measure, what kind of things could be variable or change in our experiment. So all of these things have to be taken into account. So in experiments, some of the words we use are controls. So you can have a control that tells you, what's the normal? What's the background? What do we expect to see in a normal system? 

You can have independent variables. So these are what we think is being manipulated in the experiment. So the idea here would be like, if we think a chemical is causing these mutations, if we put the chemical with the animal, ah, that would be an independent variable. Right? And then we have our dependent variables. The dependent variable is your outcome. How are you going to measure that there's a change? And so here it could be like number of limbs, right? Or it could be, like you said, we could look at the DNA. 

Right. Number of mutations. 

You know? Little 23 and Me, Ancestry dot com sort of thing. 

[LAUGHTER] 

For frogs. 

Exactly. 

It's-- do you think it changed? Did something go weird? So you do all this background legwork that you have to do before you can actually do the fun stuff. So this was just designing the experiment. Then you actually get to do the experiment. 

Nice. 

Right? And so once you do the experiment, you have to collect all the results. And so I said, OK, I got all the results, I got this data, now I have to interpret the download. Right? I have to do data analysis. And so depending on how you choose to do your data analysis, there are ways to try to protect against, I really want it to be something, because scientists are human. 

Yeah. 

Sometimes we're like, I really like your idea of this. Now, to prevent me from accidentally putting my bias into it, I can do things like what are known as blind studies. And so there's different levels of blind. You can do single blind, double blind, triple blind. So single blind is the idea the subject doesn't know what they're getting. In this case, the frogs don't care. 

Right. 

We wouldn't do a single. 

But maybe if we were testing the medication with a person. 

Exactly. 

That could be important. OK. 

So double blind is where, OK, the little frogs have no idea what they're getting, but neither does the person adding the component. And so they're just given a container, you will add this amount of liquid to their environment. 

Take one, take two. 

Exactly. 

And I don't know if that's my control or if that's a lower concentration. 

It's factor Q. 

Or a high concentration. OK. So I don't know. So I can't influence anything. 

Exactly. And then you can have a triple blind where it's, OK, froggies have no idea what they're getting, the person adding the component has no idea what they're getting, and then the person that actually does the math, the statistics, looking at the numbers, has no idea if factor F versus factor Q, which one is, you know, the chemical and which one is maybe just water. 

And so you have to do the data analysis first, get the result, and they may be like, factor Q showed mutations. And then we'll be like, oh, factor Q is that chemical. Or it might be like, factor F showed mutations. And you'd be like, factor F was water. 

[LAUGHTER] 

So this guards against that unintentional bias that we sometimes introduce. So you get your data analysis. Then you actually have to write up your results, because the idea is-- 

What? Scientists have to communicate? What? 

Yeah. Think about if you're in Las Vegas, I want to know about those freaky frogs, right? 

Yeah. 

So this information needs to be shared because when you don't share it, somebody else is going to come along and do the exact same thing. Think about the resources, the money that gets wasted if you repeat when not needed. In science, we like to repeat things. But if it's not needed, right? Let's not waste the money. 

So you write it up, you communicate it. And then, the idea is that you get other scientists to critique you because that's how you know, did I design this right? Am I interpreting correct? Because sometimes we need that feedback of-- its kind like when you're on Instagram. 

[LAUGHTER] 

And you took a really good picture and then you ask your best friend like, what do you think? And your friend is like, no, no, no. 

OK. 

So having that feedback of, you need to fix this, this, and this, before you go disseminating it out to everybody. Really important. 

And we call that process-- 

Peer review. 

Peer review, right? 

Exactly. And that's a really important point because, as much as we do to try to perform our best, most accurate design, and kind of put these layers of protection against bias in the process, maybe we forget something, or maybe there's a finding from some other source that we're not yet aware of. So part of that communication, especially if something is going to be published in a scientific journal, right? Part of that communication process involves getting expert opinions and this critique from other scientists that are knowledgeable in the field. 

Exactly. 

And that might send us back to do more experiments. 

More experiments. 

Or to do a different type of data analysis. OK. 

Because, I mean, somebody may read this and be like, oh, but they didn't think about this. So they go, I hypothesize, ah, you didn't think about this. New set of experiments. Or you may be like, my hypothesis was wrong. I need to generate a new hypothesis because my hyp-- but at least, even if you're wrong, even if your hypothesis is not supported, so it's flat out rejected, you'll learn something. 

Right. You know it's not bad. 

You're still gaining knowledge. And so it's important that people understand, just because it wasn't what you thought, it's OK. You still gained knowledge. And so for our students, they're going to be going through this over and over and over again in lab. And they're going to think about how am I going to design my experiment, what kind of questions am I going to ask, how am I going to write a hypothesis that is well-structured and then do an experiment. 

Because part of this system is the idea that if you do this experiment, you get these results, you gave your experimental protocol to a scientist that had the same skill set as you, that scientist would get the same results as you. And so if it's not repeatable, it doesn't count. 

Right. 

You know? And so that sometimes happens in science. We'll see, beautiful, this is amazing. And if someone in the field that has the same expertise tries to go and do it, doesn't work. So then it's a question of, I can't get it to work, why? 

So I think you make a really good point that our process isn't just one and done. It's not like I go, OK, step one, check, step two, check, step three, check, and then I'm done. That this is an ongoing process and sometimes midway through we can find something that kind of sends us back. So maybe we get some result that's really unexpected or puzzling. 

We might be back to kind of reading the literature and researching what's known, right? Or maybe we get to the end and we think we're done, and then we get this feedback in the peer review process and that kind of puts us right back to the beginning. So these are the steps of the method. And there's kind of a logical progression, but it's not just one, two, three, four, five, one and done. We kind of cycle back and forth between these. 

Exactly. And your peers are really important because sometimes you may want to think that you need to conduct a certain experiment, and you may be overreaching. 

[LAUGHTER] 

An example would be the scientists in China that decided to use a gene editing technique on babies. Right? And so the scientific community had already had the discussion of, wait, do not move forward. And that individual pushed forward, you know? Even though the community as a whole had had a consensus of, wait. And so when he shared his results, it wasn't like, oh, you're amazing, oh, wow. It was, why did you do that? 

Right. 

Because ethics. When you conduct these types of experiments, it is crucial that as a scientist you have ethics. 

Yeah. So that kind of sits around this whole process, right? The field, the idea of bioethics. If we want to be specific to biology, that in every step of the way there should be consideration about the choices we're making and potential implications and outcomes. And considering that ethical perspective that just because we can do something doesn't necessarily mean it's appropriate to do something. 

And I think you make a good point that when people stretch beyond that, the community as a whole really pushes back to enforce that line. 

Exactly. Because depending on the lab that you're in, you may be working with some organisms. And so whatever we're working with, we need to treat with respect. 

Absolutely. 

That's the expectation for lab. 

And each other too. 

Exactly. So our expectation as instructors for any of these courses is that you know this. You can walk us through, boom, boom, boom. And if we give you an example of a certain step, you can identify it because then we're confident that, hey, you understand this process and how this process works. 

Right. Because it's absolutely fundamental. Because this is the system that we used to acquire new knowledge. This is how we learn. 

Exactly. 

