Lab one-- How do I measure length, mass, volume, and temperature? In lab, you will be measuring the length for a variety of samples. For longer samples, we would use a meter stick. But for most of your measurements, a ruler will be sufficient. When we examine a typical ruler, we can see that it has markings along both edges. One represents English, also known as US measurements, in inches, while the other represents the metric system in centimeters and millimeters. In lab, you will record your measurements using the metric system. 

To use the ruler, place one edge of your sample at the hash mark representing the zero, or beginning of the ruler. Align the rest of your sample with the ruler. And then record how far from the zero hash mark that end of your sample is in millimeters or centimeters, depending on the length of your sample. 

In lab, you will be measuring the mass of various samples. To do this, you will be using an electronic scale. To use the electronic scale, first press the On button. Once you see the display rectangle brighten and display a number, place the white plastic weigh dish on the center of the scale. This dish will allow you to keep your samples, such as powders or liquids, collected in one spot. 

As you can see in the display window, the weigh dish has mass. You do not want to count the weigh dish's mass in your recording of your samples. So you push the zero button, which tells the scale to zero out or ignore the mass of the weigh dish. Now, the mass of the sample can be taken and recorded. 

In lab, you will be measuring the volume of various samples. You can do this type of measurement using a variety of tools, including plastic pipettes, graduated pipettes, graduated cylinders, and graduated beakers. To obtain a sample using a plastic pipette, you squeeze the pipette bulb, put the open end of the pipette in the liquid sample, and then just release the pipette bulb. The liquid will flow into the pipette. The volume obtained can be determined in milliliters by looking at the hash marks displayed on the plastic pipette. To dispense the liquid, you just squeeze the pipette bulb. 

To obtain a sample using a graduated pipette, you place the open end of the pipette tip into the liquid, and you then use the rolling wheel found at the top of the pipette dispenser to direct the flow of the liquid into the graduated pipette. You can check the volume being obtained by examining where the meniscus of the liquid aligns with the milliliter hash marks found on the sides of the pipette. To dispense the sample, you just roll the dispenser in the opposite direction that you used to obtain the sample. 

To obtain a sample using a graduated cylinder, you perform a controlled pour into the graduated cylinder. You then place the graduated cylinder on a level, stable surface, then position yourself at eye level to read where the sample's meniscus aligns with the milliliter hash marks represented on the graduated cylinder. 

To obtain a sample using a graduated beaker, you perform a controlled pour into the graduated beaker, place the graduated beaker on a level, stable surface, then position yourself at eye level to read where the sample's meniscus aligns with the milliliter hash marks represented on the graduated beaker. 

In lab, you will be measuring the temperature of various samples. We will be using thermometers with hash marks to perform these types of measurements. It is important that when you begin your temperature measurement that you place the correct end of the thermometer into the sample. The thermometer will need several minutes to equilibrate before you record your measurement. Be sure to record your measurement in Celsius and not in Fahrenheit. 