Lab three-- Understanding basic chemistry. How can I test for the presence of lipids using the Sudan III test? In lab, we will be using the Sudan III test to test for the presence of lipids in a series of samples. When performing chemical tests, it's important that you wear gloves to protect your hands from materials you are using in these tests. Before you perform any experiment, you should mentally review the following. 

One, what is being manipulated in the experiment? What is the independent variable? Two, what type of outcome is being measured? What is the dependent variable? And how are you actually measuring the outcome? Is it qualitative, like a color change, or quantitative measure, like something measured with grams, or millimeters? Number three, are there controls? And if so, what are they? And number four, what types of predictions of outcomes can you make before actually conducting the experiment? 

First, obtain a circle-shaped filter paper. On this filter paper with a pencil, you will draw six circles relatively close to the edge of the paper approximately 2 centimeters from the edge. Each circle will have a diameter of 2 centimeters. The 6 circles should be spaced equally apart from one another. And starting in a clockwise direction, be sure to label the circles from 1 to 6. Each circle will then represent a unique sample. Be sure to put your initials somewhere on the edge for your filter paper so that you can properly identify your sample later. 

Obtain six solutions. Using a different plastic pipette for each sample solution, place two drops of the designated sample onto the appropriate circle. Once completed, allow your filter paper circle to air dry. Once the filter paper circle is air dried, bring your filter paper circle to the chemical hood in the lab. Using the provided forceps, gently submerge your filter paper into the Sudan III stain. Avoid getting any of the Sudan III stain on yourself. 

Allow your filter paper to remain submerged for 5 minutes. After 5 minutes, using the provided forceps, carefully remove your filter paper from the Sudan III stain. Allow excess stain to drip off the filter paper back into the Sudan III stain tray before transferring the filter paper into the water wash tray located in the chemical hood. 

Gently move your filter paper in the water wash tray using the forceps to remove any remaining unbound stain. Once this is completed, carefully transfer your filter paper onto a set of clean paper towels and then examine your results. A brilliant orange color indicates a positive result, while anything else would be a negative result. Be sure to compare your unknown sample results with the positive and negative controls and then proceed to data analysis. 