So what is science? My name is Christy Strong. 

I am Jenifer Utz. 

And we're both faculty members in the School of Life Sciences. 

So one of the things that's important for us to think about in the beginning of any course is kind of the boundaries of what we're working with. So we're in a science course, so we should think for a minute about what science is and what it's not, and that impacts not just students in science courses, but that really impacts our whole population and our whole society because if we have misunderstandings about that process or information that's not science that people maybe think is science, then that can lead to lots of challenges. 

So the story we just heard about, looking at the controversy over the potential relationship between vaccination and autism, is a great example of what can happen when we're not clear about the lines between what is and what isn't science. So would you consider that initial study to be a good example of best practices of science? 

Absolutely not. 

OK, so what's missing? Where is that failing in what we look for for good science? 

So for good science-- one, repeatable, two, objective. And so in both these instances, it failed. 

OK. 

Repeatability-- so this was one study-- small sample number. They published it. Other scientists went, wow, that's amazing. Oh my gosh, how would people miss this? Then you have thousands of other scientists going out there conducting the same types of experiments, not getting anything like those results. And so they're sitting here going, I have the same skill set. I've got larger sample numbers. I can't reproduce your results. 

So if this was a real relationship, then other scientists with those similar skills, especially working with larger populations, should have been able to repeat these findings. So if we had this relationship present, we should have been able to detect it again and again and again and again. But that's not what happened. There have been thousands of studies evaluating a potential relationship, and the vast amount of data says there is no relationship. 

Exactly. The data actually seems to be indicating a genetic component rather than this component that was proposed initially. And so when the science is directing you in another direction, you need to be open to that, and that was one of the biggest critiques of this scientist is a lack of objectivity. 

If the data is wrong, your data is wrong, and you need to accept that and be able to rebound from the criticism that your peers give you and design new experiments to go after what the data is supporting. 

Right. What about the difference between being objective versus subjective? 

Yes, the idea of objective versus subjective-- I can't let my feelings get involved in my science. And so sometimes that's what happens. And so if you're going to be a good scientist, you need to be resilient because oftentimes you are going to be wrong, and you just need to accept that. 

Yes, that's true. 

If the data says you're wrong, you're wrong, and that's OK. 

I had many great ideas-- 

Exactly. 

--ruined by data. 

And so you have to be open to critiques by your peers because your peers have a wealth of knowledge and experience that can only help you get better. And so be open to this criticism. And then do the research. Keep up to date on what other scientists are actually writing. And so if their data is not supporting your one experiment, you need to go and figure out why. That's just logical. Like, why am I the outlier that doesn't make sense? 

Right. Maybe was there a flaw in my experimental design, or maybe was I having an equipment issue, or maybe was there sampling bias, or maybe did I use an inappropriate method of data analysis? There's all sorts of questions that we could be asking about why that difference is there and trying to figure out how we can make our next experiment better. 

Exactly. This process of science, the idea of how you design your experiment, how you carry out your experiment, how you interpret the data is key. And so we have to try to remove as much bias as possible during this process. 

And there's ways to do that. You have your controls that you build in. You can create what are called blind studies to try to remove any kind of personal bias when you go to interpret the data. So there are a variety of methods to protect against this, and a good scientist employs these methods. 

And so our students are going to have lots of practice building their scientific skills, building their resilience, and thinking about being objective in their measurements and thinking about evaluating the work of their peers and offering that professional critique and then, when they receive it, being open to it and kind of going into a mode of questioning rather than just getting defensive and saying, well, I couldn't be wrong. Of course, I'm always right. 

We always keep open the possibility that we don't know everything. We can make mistakes. We can be wrong. And so we have this process that helps us balance that out and make sure that we're being objective in our measurements, that we have repeatability, we have that verification of others finding similar results, or, if not, we need to figure out why. And so thinking about that process of science is very important. 

Exactly. And we'll get into more detail on the actual process later on in the semester. 