OK, so what are carbohydrates? Hi I'm Christy Strong. 

I'm Jenifer Utz. 

And we are faculty members in the School of Life Sciences. So Jen, when we think about carbohydrates, saccharides, sugars, what comes to mind? 

Oh, delicious things to eat. [LAUGHS] 

Exactly, so pasta? 

Bread. Yes, pasta, cookies, cakes. 

Fruit. 

Fruit. 

Some veggies? 

Some veggies. 

Or all veggies? 

All veggies. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I probably go to the intensely sugary things. But you're right. All forms of life-- plants, fruits, and vegetables, as well as animals, and other diverse forms of life, fungi and so on-- all have cells that contain carbohydrates. They're a fundamental building block of life. 

So when we're walking in the grocery store, we can look for the sugar content of something. We can know there's carbohydrates in it. What about when we're looking in a cell? What would we look for? 

Right. So we could be talking-- if we're doing chemistry, we could be talking about the names. So a name-- I'm looking for ose at the name, so glucose, fructose, those sorts of things, lactose. So ose at the end. Now, if I'm looking at the molecular formula because chemists like to represent-- 

Right, the structure. 

--molecular form-- exactly. There's patterns. And so carbohydrate is giving you a clue as to the pattern. So carb-- 

Makes me think of carbon. 

OK. And then hydrate-- 

Makes me think of water. So CH2O. It's going to be this pattern over and over again. So glucose, C6H12O6. 

O6. 

Exactly. 

OK, so for every 1 carbon, 2 times the number of hydrogen. For every 1 carbon, 1 oxygen. So we see this pattern in the structure. What does the overall shape of the molecule look like? 

It's going to be a ring-like structure that we're looking at. So if you have one ring, that's going to be a monosaccharide. 

OK, mono-- 1. 

So a simple sugar-- 1. And then what we can do is we get more complex. We can start making chains of sugars. So I could take sugar number 1 plus sugar number 2 and form what is known as a disaccharide. 

OK, 2 sugars together. All right. How is that going to happen? Are they just going to randomly crash into each other and form a bond. 

Nope, we're going to take an enzyme. The enzyme is going to grab onto sugar number 1 and grab onto sugar number 2. And it's going to catalyze a reaction. And this reaction is known as dehydration synthesis. 

OK, so I'm thinking about losing water and building something. 

Exactly. 

Perfect. 

And so it's like, OK, I got to get water out of the system. Sugar number 1, I'm stealing a hydroxyl, an OH group from you. Sugar number 2, I'm stealing a hydrogen from you. 

OK, so hydrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, H2O. 

Exactly. Unstable now, so how are we going to be able to restore that stability? 

Form a new bond. 

Exactly. And that bond is known as a glycosidic linkage. But we've already talked about different types of bonds before. Glycosidic linkage is just a fancy type of what? 

Covalent bond. 

Exactly. Equal sharing of electrons, very strong, very stable, so you can form these beautiful chains, right? So 2 would be di. We can keep extending. And if you keep extending, what do you think you call them? 

A polysaccharide. 

Right, poly for many. 

Many, mm-hmm. 

Right? And we know of examples in nature of polysaccharides. So what's one example. 

Starch. 

Yep, so starch, we find in potatoes, right? Or how about glycogen in us? 

Right, our internal energy storage in muscle and liver. 

Right. So sugars can have different roles. It could be an energy resource, right? It could be energy storage, short term. And it can also be structure. So you're living in the desert, when we look at scorpions that are all the crunchy, right? 

Yeah. 

So what makes them crunchy? 

Exoskeleton has polysaccharides in it and then plant cell walls too, for some structure and integrity. 

Exactly. 

OK, so we can build them up. Can we break them down? 

We have to be able to break them down. And so breaking them down requires an enzyme to come in. And so that enzyme comes in, grabs on to that polysaccharide, and then it conducts the type of reaction known as hydrolysis. 

OK, so I feel like we can break that down and figure out what it means too. 

Yep. 

Hydro-- water. 

Lysis? 

Break. 

Perfect. 

Water got to come in so that we can break that-- 

Break that bond. 

--glycosidic linkage. And then, oh, wait, you broke a bond. You need to go back to being stable. Water is going to allow us to go back to being stable. 

Awesome. 

OK, so in lab, what we're going to see is our students are going to be able to test for these components using Benedict's solution and using the iodine test. And so you should prepare yourself accordingly to go to lab. 