[MUSIC PLAYING] I have a question. Why does BIO 189 have a lab? 

The goal of the Biology 189 laboratory experience is to reinforce and extend your understanding of biology-based concepts presented in lecture. Each lab, you will explore select lecture topics in a deeper manner through online activities and in-person hands-on labs. 

Before coming to the lab, you'll need to complete the online portion of the course on your own. This prepares you to get the most out of your experiments, while giving you the flexibility to complete your work at a convenient time. The online content is accessible through WebCampus and includes short videos, brief readings, learning activities, and learning tips. 

All course components are designed based on research about effective learning. At the end of each lab's material, you'll see information about what to expect in the lab and what you need to do to prepare for the lab. Let us introduce you to the Course Guides. 

Wendy Wonders brings up questions that you might have in mind. Research shows reflective questions help you remember and process information better. 

Elaine Super Brain helps you practice what you've just learned. Research shows practice strengthens your learning of new information. And Elaine Super Brain's tasks can be multiple choice or open-ended questions or she might ask you to draw something and share it with your peers in the Discussion Forum. 

Kyle and Kai model the type of conversations that you should be having with fellow students to ensure you're building your knowledge. Self-testing and questioning are strong learning techniques. Kai's questions might be your questions. And last but not least, Harry gives you the best tips for learning so you can be a successful student. 

Science is a collaborative process where you can share observations, hypotheses experimental designs, and data. You are encouraged to engage in these types of behaviors when appropriate. However, this does not include sharing information with a lab mate during a quiz. Comparing the data you generated in your experiment with the data from your lab mate's experiment is encouraged. 

We know that in the real world, many different personality types exist. Everyone needs to constantly refine their ability to work with a variety of folks. The same is true in lab. In a perfect world, working with your lab mates may just be easy breezy the entire semester. 

However, what you may find is that working relationships are just that-- work. To support a healthy working relationship in the lab, we encourage you to be clear in your expectations of one another and be professional in your communications. Come prepared for the lab and be respectful of one another's time and perspective. 