I began to learn the nature of surprises, thankfully, 
when I was fairly young as a writer. Before that, like 
every beginner, I thought you could beat, pummel, and 
thrash an idea into existence. Under such treatment, of 
course, any decent idea folds up its paws, turns on its 
back, fixes its eyes on eternity, and dies. 
It was with great relief, then, that in my early 
twenties I floundered into a word-association process in 
which I simply got out of bed each morning, walked to 
 my desk, and put down any word or series of words that 
happened along in my head. 
I would then take arms against the word, or for it, 
and bring on an assortment of characters to weigh the 
word and show me its meaning in my own life. An hour 
 or two hours later, to my amazement, a new story 
would be finished and done. The surprise was total and 
lovely. I soon found that I would have to work this way 
for the rest of my life. 
First I rummaged my mind for words that could 
 describe my personal nightmares, fears of night and 
time from my childhood, and shaped stories from these. 
Then I took a long look at the green apple trees 
and the old house I was born in and the house next door 
where lived my grandparents, and all the lawns of the 
 summers I grew up in, and I began to try words for all 
that. 
I had to send myself back, with words as catalysts, 
to open the memories out and see what they had to 
offer. 
 	So from the age of twenty-four to thirty-six hardly 
a day passed when I didn’t stroll myself across a recollection of my grandparents’ northern Illinois grass, 
hoping to come across some old half-burnt firecracker, 
a rusted toy, or a fragment of letter written to myself in 
 some young year hoping to contact the older person I 
became to remind him of his past, his life, his people, 
his joys, and his drenching sorrows. 
Along the way I came upon and collided, through 
word-association, with old and true friendships. I borrowed my friend John Huff from my childhood in Arizona and shipped him East to Green Town so that I 
could say good-bye to him properly. 
Along the way, I sat me down to breakfasts, 
lunches, and dinners with the long dead and much 
 loved.
Thus I fell into surprise. I came on the old and best 
ways of writing through ignorance and experiment and 
was startled when truths leaped out of bushes like quail 
before gunshot. I blundered into creativity as any child 
 learning to walk and see. I learned to let my senses and 
my Past tell me all that was somehow true. 

