      The facts about John Huff, aged twelve, are simple 
and soon stated. He could pathfind more trails than 
anyone since time began, could leap from the sky like a 
chimpanzee from a vine, could live underwater two 
minutes and slide fifty yards downstream from where 
you last saw him. The baseballs you pitched him he hit 
in the apple trees, knocking down harvests. He ran 
laughing. He sat easy. He was not a bully. He was kind. 
He knew the names of all the wild flowers and when 
the moon would rise and set. He was, in fact, the only 
god living in the whole of Green Town, Illinois, during 
the twentieth century that Douglas Spaulding knew of. 
      And right now he and Douglas were hiking out 
beyond town on another warm and marble-round day, 
the sky blue blown-glass reaching high, the creeks 
bright with mirror waters fanning over white stones. It 
was a day as perfect as the flame of a candle. 
      Douglas walked through it thinking it would go on 
this way forever. The sound of a good friend whistling 
like an oriole, pegging the softball, as you horse- 
danced, key-jingled the dusty paths; things were at 
hand and would remain. 
      It was such a fine day and then suddenly a cloud 
crossed the sky, covered the sun, and did not move 
again. 
      John Huff had been speaking quietly for several 
minutes. Now Douglas stopped on the path and looked 
over at him. 
“John, say that again.” 
“You heard me the first time, Doug.” 
“Did you say you were—going away?” 
      John took a yellow and green train ticket solemnly 
from his pocket and they both looked at it. 
 	“Tonight!” said Douglas. “My gosh! Tonight we 
were going to play Red Light, Green Light and Statues! 
How come, all of a sudden? You been here in Green 
Town all my life. You just don’t pick up and leave!” 
      “It’s my father,” said John. “He’s got a job in Milwaukee. We weren’t sure until today . . . ” 
      They sat under an old oak tree on the side of the 
hill looking back at town. Out beyond, in sunlight, the 
town was painted with heat, the windows all gaping. 
Douglas wanted to run back in there where the town, by 
its very weight, its houses, their bulk, might enclose 
and prevent John’s ever getting up and running off. 

